New Blog Post: Collecting OpenTelemetry-compliant Java logs from files (#5600)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/blog/2024/collecting-otel-compliant-java-logs-from-files/index.md

---
title: Collecting OpenTelemetry-compliant Java logs from files
linkTitle: OTel-compliant Java logs from files

> date: 2024-12-03

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: 2024-12-07
```

Since we have a queue of blog posts right now, we will ship fifo, so https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/pull/5575 comes first, this one second. I recommend that we put ~2days between publishing the two

> date: 2024-12-07

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: 2024-12-09
```

did not think about the weekend, apologies, will publish it any minute now :-)

---
title: Collecting OpenTelemetry-compliant Java logs from files
linkTitle: OTel-compliant Java logs from files

> date:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: 2024-12-02
```

please keep this open until we have set the exact date.

I would like to wait for @chalin to re-review and since this week most people are out due to Thanksgiving in the US I would argue that publishing next week is better anyways

Author: ```suggestion
date: 2024-12-03
```

              "timeUnixNano": "1730435085776869000",
              "observedTimeUnixNano": "1730435085776944000",
              "severityNumber": 9,
              "severityText": "INFO",
              "body": {
                "stringValue": "Order order-12035 successfully placed"
              },
              "attributes": [
                {
                  "key": "customerId",
                  "value": {
                    "stringValue": "customer-49"
                  }
                },
                {
                  "key": "thread.id",
                  "value": {
                    "intValue": "44"
                  }
                },
                {
                  "key": "thread.name",
                  "value": {
                    "stringValue": "grpc-default-executor-1"
                  }
                }
              ],
              "flags": 1,
              "traceId": "42de1f0dd124e27619a9f3c10bccac1c",
              "spanId": "270984d03e94bb8b"
            }
          ]
        }
      ],
      "schemaUrl": "https://opentelemetry.io/schemas/1.24.0"
    }
  ]
}
```

</details>

## Configure the Collector to ingest the OTLP/JSON logs

> ![OpenTelemetry Collector OTLP/JSON pipeline](otel-collector-otlpjson-pipeline.png)
> 
> You can also
> [view OTel Collector pipeline](https://www.otelbin.io/s/69739d790cf279c203fc8efc86ad1a876a2fc01a)
> with OTelBin.

Author: ```suggestion
{{< figure class="figure" src="otel-collector-otlpjson-pipeline.png" attr="View OTel Collector pipeline with OTelBin" attrlink="https://www.otelbin.io/s/69739d790cf279c203fc8efc86ad1a876a2fc01a" >}}
```

---
title: Collecting OpenTelemetry-compliant Java logs from files

> linkTitle: Collecting OTel-compliant Java logs from files

Author: ```suggestion
linkTitle: OTel-compliant Java logs from files
```

@tiffany76 @zeitlinger please review this attempt to shorten the link title

## Native solution for Java logs

The OpenTelemetry Java Instrumentation agent and SDK now offer an easy solution
to convert logs from frameworks like SLF4J/Logback or Log4j2 into OTel-compliant
JSON logs on stdout with all resource and log attributes.

This is a true turnkey solution:

- No code or dependency changes, just a few configuration adjustments typical
  for production deployment.
- No complex field mapping in the log collector. Just use the
  [OTLP/JSON connector](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/connector/otlpjsonconnector)
  to ingest the payload.
- Automatic correlation between logs, traces, and metrics.

This blog post shows how to set up this solution step by step.

- In the first part, we'll show how to configure the Java application to output
  logs in the OTLP/JSON format.
- In the second part, we'll show how to configure the OpenTelemetry Collector to
  ingest the logs.
- Finally, we'll show a Kubernetes-specific setup to handle container logs.

![OTLP/JSON Architecture](otlpjson-architecture.png)

## Configure Java application to output OTLP/JSON logs

{{% alert title="Note" color="info" %}}

> Blog post instructions can easily get outdated. In case of issues, check the
> [reference Kubernetes setup](https://github.com/grafana/docker-otel-lgtm/tree/main/examples/java/json-logging-otlp),
> which is continuously updated and tested against the latest versions.

Author: "sample" in the blog post to refer to https://github.com/grafana/docker-otel-lgtm/tree/main/examples/java/json-logging-otlp

Shall we consider something like

```suggestion
Blog post instructions can easily get outdated. In case of issues, check this
[sample app deployed on Kubernetes](https://github.com/grafana/docker-otel-lgtm/tree/main/examples/java/json-logging-otlp),
which is continuously updated and tested against the latest versions.
```

Body: Str(Order order-12035 successfully placed)
Attributes:
     -> customerId: Str(cust-12345)
     -> thread.id: Int(44)
     -> thread.name: Str(grpc-default-executor-1)
Trace ID: 42de1f0dd124e27619a9f3c10bccac1c
Span ID: 270984d03e94bb8b
Flags: 1
     {"kind": "exporter", "data_type": "logs", "name": "debug"}
```

Verify the logs in the OpenTelemetry backend.

After the pipeline works end-to-end, ensure production readiness:

- Remove the `debug` exporter from the `logs` pipeline in the OTel Collector
  configuration.
- Disable file and console exporters in the logging framework (for example,
  `logback.xml`) but keep using the logging configuration to filter logs. The
  OTel Java agent will output JSON logs to stdout.

```xml
<!-- tested with logback-classic v1.5.11 -->
<configuration>
  <logger name="com.example" level="debug"/>
  <root level="info">
    <!-- No appender as the OTel Agent emits otlpjson logs through stdout -->
    <!--
      IMPORTANT enable a console appender to troubleshoot cases where
      logs are missing in the OTel backend
    -->
  </root>
</configuration>
```

## Configure an OpenTelemetry Collector in Kubernetes to handle container logs

> To support Kubernetes and container specifics, add a standard parsing step in
> the pipeline without specific mapping configuration.
> 
> Use the OTel Collector File Log Receiver's
> [`container`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/pkg/stanza/docs/operators/container.md)
> parser to handle container logging specifics.

Author: ```suggestion
To support Kubernetes and container specifics, add the built-in 
[`container`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/pkg/stanza/docs/operators/container.md) 
parsing step in the pipeline without needing specific mapping configuration.
```

@tiffany76 @zeitlinger please review

      http:

processors:
  batch:
  resourcedetection:
    detectors: ['env', 'system']
    override: false

connectors:
  otlpjson:

service:
  pipelines:
    logs/raw_otlpjson:
      receivers: [filelog/otlp-json-logs]
      # (i) no need for processors before the otlpjson connector
      # Declare processors in the shared "logs" pipeline below
      processors: []
      exporters: [otlpjson]
    logs:
      receivers: [otlp, otlpjson]
      processors: [resourcedetection, batch]
      # remove "debug" for production deployments
      exporters: [otlphttp, debug]

exporters:
  debug:
    verbosity: detailed
  # Exporter to the OTLP backend like `otlphttp`
  otlphttp:
```

## Conclusion

This blog post showed how to collect file-based Java logs with OpenTelemetry.
The solution is easy to set up and provides a turnkey solution for converting
logs from frameworks like SLF4J/Logback or Log4j2 into OTel-compliant JSON logs
on stdout with all resource and log attributes. This JSON format is certainly
verbose, but it generally has minimal impact on performances and offers a solid
balance by providing highly contextualized logs that can be correlated with
traces and metrics.

> If any of the steps are unclear or you encounter issues, check the
> [reference Kubernetes setup](https://github.com/grafana/docker-otel-lgtm/tree/main/examples/java/json-logging-otlp),
> which is continuously updated and tested against the latest versions.

Author: ```suggestion
If any of the steps are unclear or you encounter issues, check this
[sample app deployed on Kubernetes](https://github.com/grafana/docker-otel-lgtm/tree/main/examples/java/json-logging-otlp),
which is continuously updated and tested against the latest versions.
```suggestion

@zeitlinger @zeitlinger
